Elastic Security Assistant initial docs (8.8.1) (#3425)
elastic/security-docs: docs/assistant/security-assistant.asciidoc

:frontmatter-description: The Elastic Security Assistant is a generative AI open-code chat assistant.
:frontmatter-tags-products: [security]
:frontmatter-tags-content-type: [overview]
:frontmatter-tags-user-goals: [get-started]

The Elastic Security Assistant utilizes generative AI to bolster your cybersecurity operations team. It allows users to interact with {elastic-sec} for tasks such as alert investigation, incident response, and query generation or conversion using natural language and much more.

This includes a connector for OpenAI and Azure OpenAI Service, which powers the Security Assistant.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/assistant.gif[Animation of the Security Assistant chat window,90%]

[IMPORTANT]
====
This is an initial release of the Elastic Security Assistant. While designed to enhance your analysis with smart dialogues, its capabilities are still developing. Users should leverage it sensibly as the reliability of its responses might vary. Your insights, patience, and feedback help us calibrate this feature for optimal use. Always cross-verify any returned advice for accurate cybersecurity threat detection and response, insights, and query generation.

> Also, the data you provide to the Security Assistant is _not_ anonymized, and it is stored and processed by the third-party AI provider. This includes any data included in conversations for analysis or context, such as alert or event data, detection rule configurations, queries, and so on. Therefore, be careful about sharing any confidential or sensitive details while using this feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, the data you provide to the Security Assistant is _not_ anonymized, and is stored and processed by the third-party AI provider. This includes any data included in conversations for analysis or context, such as alert or event data, detection rule configurations, queries, and so on. Therefore, be careful about sharing any confidential or sensitive details while using this feature.
```

====

.Requirements
[sidebar]
--

> * The Elastic Security Assistant is available in {elastic-sec} version 8.8.1 and later.

Author: It'd prob be good to mention both (the Security Assistant and the connector), but they could be in a single statement to reduce repetition:
```suggestion
* The Elastic Security Assistant and Generative AI connector are available in {stack} version 8.8.1 and later.
```

* This feature requires an https://www.elastic.co/pricing[Enterprise subscription].

* You must have an account with a third-party generative AI provider, which the Security Assistant uses to generate responses. Supported providers are OpenAI (`gpt-3.5-turbo` model) and Azure OpenAI Service (any model).
--

[discrete]
[[set-up-ai-assistant]]
== Set up the Security Assistant

You must complete these steps before you can use the Security Assistant:

> . Create an API key with your AI provider to authenticate requests from the Security Assistant. You'll use this in a later step. Refer to the provider's documentation on generating API keys:

Reviewer 2: Super, super nitty suggestion here: I think "for" is the more appropriate preposition to use here. I think "on" is typically used to describe a location, action, or state whereas "for" is used to indicate a purpose, reason, or duration of time. 

```suggestion
. Create an API key with your AI provider to authenticate requests from the Security Assistant. You'll use this in a later step. Refer to the provider's documentation for generating API keys:
```

Author: I think "on" also works to refer to a topic, like "I read a book on programming," but "for" works here too.

+
* https://platform.openai.com/docs/api-reference[OpenAI]
* https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/cognitive-services/openai/reference[Azure OpenAI Service]

> . Add the following feature flag to {kib}'s configuration settings:

Reviewer 2: Totally optional suggestion: wdyt about briefly describing what this feature flag does? For example:

```suggestion
. Add the following feature flag to {kib}'s configuration settings to enable the Security Assistant and the Generative AI connector:
```

Author: I'm not sure it's necessary; from the flag's name `assistantEnabled` it seems clear what it does, and the next step about the connector also says it requires the flag. Also, "enable Assistant the connector" could be mistaken as "_turn on_ the Assistant and connector" instead of "unhide them."

+
`xpack.securitySolution.enableExperimental: ['assistantEnabled']` 
+
The configuration method depends on your deployment type:
+

> * *Self-managed (on-premises) deployments*: Add the feature flag to the `kibana.yml` file, which is used to {kibana-ref}/settings.html[configure {kib}], then restart {kib}.

Reviewer 2: Users need to save changes to their `kibana.yml` file before restarting their deployment, right? Or do we not need to call out this step because we can safely assume they'll do it without us telling them to?

Author: I think we could omit saving the file, since that's part of updating any file, for any application. At first this didn't even include "restart Kibana" but I felt like that's more likely to get overlooked and a reminder would help.

* *{ecloud} deployments*: Use the YAML editor in the {ecloud} console to add the feature flag to {cloud}/ec-manage-kibana-settings.html[{kib} user settings].

. Create a {kibana-ref}/gen-ai-action-type.html[Generative AI connector], using the AI provider's API key and URL to configure communication between {elastic-sec} and the provider. You can do this in {kib} at *Stack Management* -> *Connectors*, or from within the Security Assistant.
+

> NOTE: The Generative AI connector type requires the `assistantEnabled` feature flag, and won't be available without it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: The Generative AI connector type requires the `assistantEnabled` feature flag for use.
```

[discrete]
[[start-chatting]]
== Start chatting

> To open the Security Assistant, press *Cmd + ;* (or *Ctrl + ;* in Windows) from anywhere in the {security-app}. This opens the *Welcome* conversation context, where you can ask general questions about {elastic-sec}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To open the Security Assistant, press *Cmd + ;* (or *Ctrl + ;* in Windows) from anywhere in the {security-app}. This opens the *Welcome* chat interface, where you can ask general questions about {elastic-sec}.
```

> You can also chat with the Security Assistant from several areas of {elastic-sec}, and context-specific data and prompts will populate your conversation.

Reviewer 2: Another super nitty edit: When it comes to orienting users, I feel like "within" is more direct than "of". Making this edit is totally up to you ofc.

```suggestion
You can also chat with the Security Assistant from several areas within {elastic-sec}, and context-specific data and prompts will populate your conversation.
```

* <<view-alert-details, Alert details>> or Event details flyout: Click *Chat* while viewing the details of an alert or event.
* <<rules-ui-management, Rules page>>: Select one or more rules, then click the magic wand icon (🪄✨) at the top of the page next to the *Rules* title.
* <<data-quality-dash, Data Quality dashboard>>: Select the *Incompatible fields* tab, then click *Chat*. (This is only available for fields marked red, indicating they're incompatible).
* <<timelines-ui, Timeline>>: Select the *Security Assistant* tab.

> All chat history persists within your session, so you can navigate away to other areas of {elastic-sec}, then later return to ongoing conversations.

Reviewer 3: I think so @joepeeples? Maybe add a `(unrelated to your kibana user session)` or something at the end so users aren't surprised if they log out and back in as another user and they still see the previous conversations?

> All chat history persists within your session, so you can navigate away to other areas of {elastic-sec}, then later return to ongoing conversations.

Author: How about:
```suggestion
All chat history and custom quick prompts persist in local browser storage, so you can navigate away to other areas of {elastic-sec} or log in as different {kib} user, then return to ongoing conversations.
```

> All chat history persists within your session, so you can navigate away to other areas of {elastic-sec}, then later return to ongoing conversations.

Author: Gotcha, a note callout sounds good. It's a fair amount of info now, but it's intended to prevent user confusion, and we can always revisit if needed.
```suggestion
NOTE: All chat history and custom quick prompts persist in local browser storage, allowing you to navigate away to other areas in {elastic-sec}, then return to ongoing conversations. This also means that chats persist across multiple users if they use the same browser; be sure clear any conversations that you don't want available to other users.
```

[discrete]
[[interact-with-assistant]]
== Interact with the Security Assistant

Use these features to adjust and act on your conversations with the Security Assistant:

* Select a _system prompt_ at the beginning of a conversation to establish how detailed and technical you want the Security Assistant's answers to be.
+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/system-prompt.gif[The system prompt drop-down menu,90%]
+

> NOTE: The system prompt is only configurable at the start of a conversation. To reconfigure, clear the chat and start a new conversation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: The system prompt is only configurable at the start of a conversation. To reconfigure it, clear the chat and start a new conversation.
```

> * Select a _quick prompt_ at the bottom of the chat window to get help writing a prompt for a specific purpose, such as summarizing an alert or converting a query from a legacy SIEM to {elastic-sec}. Available quick prompts vary based on context. You can also add your own custom quick prompts for questions that you frequently ask the Security Assistant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Select a _quick prompt_ at the bottom of the chat window to get help writing a prompt for a specific purpose, such as summarizing an alert or converting a query from a legacy SIEM to {elastic-sec}. Available quick prompts vary based on context. You can also add custom quick prompts for questions you frequently ask the Security Assistant.
```

+
[role="screenshot"]
image::images/quick-prompts.png[Quick prompts highlighted below a conversation,90%]

> * Use available buttons to perform actions in the conversation history and prompt entry area:

Reviewer 2: Is there a certain scenario where these buttons wouldn't be available? Also, would "these" or "the following" work in place of "available" or is that too literal? 

```suggestion
* Use these buttons to perform actions in the conversation history and prompt entry area:
```

** *Add note to timeline* (image:images/icon-add-note.png[Add note icon,16,16]): Create a note in Timeline using the selected text.
** *Add to existing case* (image:images/icon-add-to-case.png[Add to case icon,19,16]): Add a comment to an existing case using the selected text.
** *Copy to clipboard* (image:images/icon-copy.png[Copy to clipboard icon,17,18]): Copy the text to clipboard to paste elsewhere. This is also helpful for resubmitting a previous prompt.

> ** *Add to timeline* (image:images/icon-add-to-timeline.png[Copy to clipboard icon,17,18]): Add a filter or query to Timeline using the text. This button appears for certain queries in the Security Assistant's responses.

Reviewer 3: I think I mentioned this in chat, but this action can be finicky since a specific `query language keyword` must be present in the text before the codeblock for it to correctly determine the language and function (if the query itself was even valid). Perhaps too much for the docs, but would be useful in a `tips` section. Thankfully you can work with the assistant by adjusting the prompt to have it mention the specific query language keyword before the codeblock. The keywords for EQL, KQL and DSL are [as follows](https://github.com/elastic/kibana/blob/95951b95956132e95bb6baf7618b8943618e6f89/x-pack/packages/kbn-elastic-assistant/impl/assistant/use_conversation/helpers.ts#L34-L38):

```
  const types = {
    eql: ['Event Query Language', 'EQL sequence query'],
    kql: ['Kibana Query Language', 'KQL Query'],
    dsl: ['Elasticsearch QueryDSL', 'Elasticsearch Query DSL', 'Elasticsearch DSL'],
  };
```
e.g.:

```
U: Can you generate an `Event Query Language` query that looks for four failed logons followed by a successful logon?
U: Can you generate an Elasticsearch DSL filter for host.name: "REALLY BAD HOST"? (Be sure to leave off the "query" object wrapper since we just want the filter)
```

Author: Hm, good to know. It might still be worth mentioning even in the initial docs, to help ensure that this feature works as expected for previewing users.
```suggestion
** *Add to timeline* (image:images/icon-add-to-timeline.png[Copy to clipboard icon,17,18]): Add a filter or query to Timeline using the text. This button appears for certain queries in the Security Assistant's responses. 
+
TIP: Be sure to specify which query language you'd like the Security Assistant to use for queries. For example: "Can you generate an Event Query Language query to find four failed logins followed by a successful login?"
```

> ** *Add to timeline* (image:images/icon-add-to-timeline.png[Copy to clipboard icon,17,18]): Add a filter or query to Timeline using the text. This button appears for certain queries in the Security Assistant's responses.

Reviewer 2: Would it make sense to move this up, after the first bullet? In terms of organization, it might be good to group that functionality.

Author: Not exactly, because the user will encounter the two buttons (**Add note to timeline** and **Add to timeline**) in different parts of the app. This will be delineated more in the next iteration of docs, where we'll go into specific workflows in more depth, but for now this list is generally ordered by where the user will find the buttons.

Reviewer 2: Makes sense - I figured this list might've been ordered to reflect the UI order.
